---
title: Geoengineering our way out of Nuclear Winter?
subtitle: Why emergency global warming probably isn't a good plan.
image: /img/9_geoengineering/geo1.png
---

In the aftermath of a major nuclear war, smoke from the fires would rise to the stratosphere and block the sun for years, plunging the world into cold and darkness. Some people have suggested that pumping short-lived greenhouse gases into the atmosphere could create just enough emergency global warming to solve the problem. In this post, I take a closer look at one such idea and argue that it probably won't work.

# Context
I wrote this document during my time as a science advisor for [The Open Philanthropy Project](https://www.openphilanthropy.org/), an organization interested in mitigating the risk of global catastrophes like [nuclear winter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_winter). I'd come across the paper [Counteracting the climate effects of volcanic eruptions using short‐lived greenhouse gases](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/2014GL061886) (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014) and wondered whether their idea of emergency global warming made sense, so I wrote this analysis of their proposal and its implications.

# The Paper
Geoengineering is a fascinating (and controversial) area of research with important implications for the future of humanity. There’s been plenty written about geoengineering to cool down the planet in order to slow down climate change, but this paper is the first to figure out whether we could also _warm up_ the planet if we needed to. One might want to do this in response to a major volcanic eruption, a nuclear war, or other events that inject massive amounts of smoke into the upper atmosphere. Climate scientists believe that this sort of event could darken and cool the planet significantly for a decade or more, causing crops to fail and people to starve. The idea of nuclear winter is based on [computer simulations](http://climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/pdf/MillsNWeft224.pdf) of the global climate and by significant evidence that [this already happened at least once](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toba_catastrophe_theory).

## Abstract

The paper's abstract is worth reproducing in full:

```A large volcanic eruption might constitute a climate emergency, significantly altering global temperature and precipitation for several years. Major future eruptions will occur, but their size or timing cannot be predicted. We show, for the first time, that it may be possible to counteract these climate effects through deliberate emissions of short‐lived greenhouse gases, dampening the abrupt impact of an eruption. We estimate an emission pathway countering a hypothetical eruption 3 times the size of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. We use a global climate model to evaluate global and regional responses to the eruption, with and without counteremissions. We then raise practical, financial, and ethical questions related to such a strategy. Unlike the more commonly discussed geoengineering to mitigate warming from long‐lived greenhouse gases, designed emissions to counter temporary cooling would not have the disadvantage of needing to be sustained over long periods. Nevertheless, implementation would still face significant challenges.```
[(Fuglestvedt et al., 2014)](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/2014GL061886) 
 
## Their main findings
The authors analyze whether emergency warming could be achieved by injecting short-lived greenhouse gases (GHGs) into the upper atmosphere in the months after a winter-causing event. The authors conclude that:

1. This intervention requires short-lived GHGs, preferably with a lifetime (stratospheric _e_\-folding time) of 1 to 1.5 years.
2. A hypothetical GHG with the radiative forcing of CFC-11 and a lifetime of 1 year would be needed at 35 ppb to produce 5  Wm<sup>-2</sup> (which is how much the authors calculate that we’d need). 
3. The best among currently known GHGs is HFC-152a, which has no effect on ozone, an _e_\-folding time of 1.5 years, and a (dilute) radiative forcing of 0.098  Wm<sup>-2</sup>ppb<sup>-1</sup>.<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup> We’d need a peak concentration of 78 ppb during year one, which translates to 1,250 teragrams (Tg) [see How much would be needed?].

## Their assumptions
The authors explicitly note that this paper is meant to be a first, crude approximation to determine whether a more careful study should be conducted at all. With that in mind, let’s go through the simplifying assumptions that they made.
1. The authors used a limited kind of ocean simulation (a slab ocean). It seems that seasonal and regional details of their data are particularly dependent on the choice of model and the effects of the as-yet-ignored ocean circulation.<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup> 
2. They did not model the emissions from a volcanic eruption 3x the size of Pinatubo. Instead, they used a previously-published dataset of the radiative forcing caused by Pinatubo at various times and locations around the world, and multiplied the optical density by 3 everywhere. It’s a handy approximation.
3. They ignored GHG transport through the atmosphere. Their GHG showed up in the model already well-mixed around the world, decaying according to a predetermined concentration schedule (which corresponds to an _e_\-folding time of about 1 year). This is a big assumption [see Atmospheric transport of GHGs]. 
4. Since none of the existing GHGs are great for this application, they used a fictional one with the same radiative forcing of CFC-11<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup> but an (ideal) residence time of 1 year and zero effect on the ozone layer [see Alternative chemicals].
5. They assumed that the GHG is ramped up linearly during year one, starting immediately and ending at 35 ppb in the atmosphere. This response speed requires the GHG to be made and stockpiled in advance, and released right away [see Scale-up].
6. They totally lowballed the market price of HFCs [see Price].

# Summary of my critique
There are major problems with the scheme suggested in (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014).
1. The authors calculate that their scheme would cost $1 trillion. I think that this estimate is wrong, and that even an optimistic market price would place the total cost somewhere closer to $12.5 trillion [see Price]. That estimate includes manufacturing cost of hydrocarbons, excludes storage and delivery costs, and assumes that preparations happen over ~15 years.<sup id="a4">[4](#f4)</sup> The total price goes up by $5 trillion if we want to build all the associated industrial capacity in one year (as might happen if we wait until after a big climate event to start implementing this plan).
2. The raw materials needed for such a scheme are a limiting factor that the authors never considered. Hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) production requires a lot of fluorite, the raw material from which we get fluorine. I calculate that this scheme would require between 1.8 and 10 times the estimated total global reserves of fluorite [see Other costs].
3. It is unclear whether intentional warming is the best option for any scenario, given that small enough events (1x Pinatubo) require no intervention and—for the previous reasons—we can’t afford to fix even slightly larger ones (3x Pinatubo). My best estimate is that better food production and management would be enough to cover any middle scenarios [see Alternatives].
4. Given the raw cost of this project in money ($12.5 trillion) and greenhouse gas emissions (12-18% of 2010’s total emissions), which would have to be paid before the nuclear war, I can’t imagine that this is a realistic possibility or the best way to address the risk of nuclear winter. Also, did I mention that it would only cost the world $1 trillion to bring climate change under control at a non-catastrophic temperature? I think that the opportunity cost exceeds the potential benefits from this idea [see Alternatives].

Important qualification: I think it’s reasonably possible to design an HFC that would have ~7x better radiative properties, and which could presumably be used at 1/7th the concentration and cost. This would bring the project down from impossible to merely ludicrous<sup id="a5">[5](#f5)</sup> [see Alternative chemicals]. It’s important to note, though, that radiative forcing estimates always have a minimum inherent uncertainty of 25% [see How much would be needed?].

# FAQ
## Global warming potential
```How come Halocarbons are such a big part of our current climate change problem? If we’re able to cause this much damage accidentally, shouldn’t it be cheap to cause 10x more on purpose?```

Sadly, no. Current GHGs are such a large component of climate change because we’re taking the long view. Their importance comes mostly from their long lifetimes, and only to a lesser extent from intrinsic radiative efficiency. Emergency warming would require short-lived compounds added to the atmosphere really fast, and in very large quantities. The high contribution of GHGs to long-term climate change is misleading [still, see this figure of their current concentrations in the atmosphere].
## Alternative chemicals
```Should we be looking outside of HFCs for other warming agent candidates? Could we create a suitable gas if one doesn’t already exist? How likely would that be to work?```

I don’t know whether there already exist molecules other than halocarbons that could be worth considering, but I consider that to be very unlikely (0-10%, see Confidence levels). My only reason for believing this is that two of the authors in this paper, (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014), also authored (Hodnebrog et al., 2013), the comprehensive and recent review of halocarbons and their effect on climate change. I believe that if they thought that other molecules could fulfill this role they would have mentioned it. 

That being said, I don’t know of any fundamental reason why a cheap, small molecule with good IR spectra (infrared absorption and emission) and short-ish lifetime couldn’t be designed. In fact, I think it would be relatively easy to reduce the lifetime of a given substance by adding known weaknesses,<sup id="a6">[6](#f6)</sup> which simplifies the optimization problem somewhat. I think it is merely unlikely (0-33%) that we could design a substance with the proper lifetime (~1 yr) and the radiative efficiency comparable to that of the strongest halocarbons (so about 0.7  Wm<sup>-2</sup>ppb<sup>-1</sup>; see the figure on Radiative Efficiency).

My later estimates of how much stuff would be needed (and how much it would cost) are based on the cost of known HFCs, roughly equivalent to HFC-152a. If we could design an ideal HFC as described above, the costs of all kinds would go down by a factor of about 7.7

# [The rest of this article is under construction]

In the scale-up section I note that there are limited reserves of the raw material from which we get fluorine (F) [see Other costs]. One could think of going back to CFCs, which contain less F, but halocarbons with more chlorine (Cl) and fewer F atoms tend to have a higher ozone-depletion potential. Indeed, HFCs were developed precisely for their way, way lower ozone-depletion potential, compared to previous halocarbons8. Any new candidate substance for this project, then, would have to be developed optimizing for at least four parameters: short lifetime, high radiative forcing, low ozone depletion potential, and also low F content.9
How much would be needed?
The authors ((Fuglestvedt et al., 2014)) calculate that countering a 3X Pinatubo eruption would require 5  Wm<sup>-2</sup> of radiative forcing. Achieving that with HFC-152a would require a release of 1,250 Tg (teragrams) during year one, which is 8,333x more than the global production of the hydrofluorocarbon with the highest current production, HFC-134a.10 
A useful number to know is the uncertainty of potency calculations. (Hodnebrog et al., 2013), the best source I know of, estimates an uncertainty (5-95% confidence range) of about 25% for their numbers on Radiative Efficiency. This number directly affects how much of a GHG would be needed for an intentional warming effort, and therefore the total cost estimate.
It’s also worth noting one additional source of uncertainty: the lifetime of GHGs also depends on their context, including concentration when it gets high enough:
“In reality the chemical losses of pollutants vary in time and space and, if the magnitude of emissions are sufficient (e.g., for methane), the emissions themselves can influence the chemistry of the atmosphere and hence the pollutant’s lifetime.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013)
Because of these two sources of error, I would consider 25% to the be the minimum uncertainty (at the moment) for how much GHG would be needed. 
Scale-up
How would HFCs or another warming agent be manufactured for this at scale? What would the process of manufacturing and stockpiling them (if necessary) look like? (E.g. estimates of how long it would take, how much it would cost, where it would be done, what effects the manufacturing might have)
Price
The authors estimate that this project would cost “on the order of” a trillion dollars11, but that number in turn depends on the actual cost of the greenhouse gas. The authors implicitly use the lower bound of the cost range, $1000/tonne. This was the cost during the 1980s to make CFCs, which are relatively easy and cheap to make.12 HFCs are more complex and expensive to make, and cost somewhere between $9,000 and $15,000 per tonne.13 Thus, an optimistic estimate of $10,000 per tonne brings the overall cost to $10 trillion for each 1000 Tg of HFC (remember, the estimated amount of HFC-152a needed would be 1250 Tg, costing $12.5 trillion).
Time
An HFC would have to be made in advance—as opposed to ramping up production as fast as possible in response to an event. There are two reasons for this.
First, HFCs like HFC-245fa are made through a chemical process with >10 unit operations14 (Archie McCulloch, 2009).15 Thus, existing industrial capacity dedicated to other processes couldn’t simply be repurposed to make HFC-245fa in a pinch.16 I didn’t look up exact numbers on this, but I estimate that it would take at least one year to build the industrial capacity needed to make this much HFC-245fa17. That seems like a significant problem to me, given that ~80% of the climate effects caused by 3x Pinatubo have disappeared by year 6 [see the figure 3x Pinatubo].
Second, building up enough capacity for that emergency production would be extremely expensive. I performed a Fermi estimate for the capital cost that would be required to build enough industrial capacity to make 1,250 Tg of HFC in a year. 
    • I found a chemical engineering exam from 2002 where one problem statement mentions a (generic) chemical plant with an annual production of 30,000 tons of product and a capital cost of 120M (million dollars). 
    • I found a table of the sizes of various fluorocarbon production facilities; except for one 90,000 tonne/yr outlier, they are all smaller than 30,000 tonne/yr.18 This tells me that the size is about right. The same document contains this quote linking capacity to the cost of building a plant: “The company is also planning to build a $100m worldscale HFC-134a plant at its Geismar site, next door to Baton Rouge. The first 14 000 tonne/year is due onstream in Q2 1994 and capacity will be doubled by 1995-96.” [source]. Though the numbers are out of date, they agree surprisingly well on a price of $100-120M per 30,000 tonnes/yr.
Extrapolating from the later (and higher) of those estimates, it would cost 5 trillion dollars to build the necessary industrial capacity to make all this GHG in just one year. This is in addition to the manufacturing price discussed previously because all this capacity would become idle after just one year, whereas normally its cost gets spread over a useful lifetime of ~15 years. If we let the HFC be produced over that same lifetime, on the other hand, we can reasonably assume that the capital cost is included in the price. Put another way, making 1250 Tg of HFC costs ~12 trillion, and if you want to make that all over the course of 1 year, it will cost you an extra 5 trillion, for a grand total of 17 trillion.
Other costs
The fluorochemical industry depends entirely19 on fluorite as a raw material. The global reserves of fluorite are estimated at 230 Tg [source]. Different halocarbons would require different amount of fluorite as raw material, both because of their different F content and because of differences in the manufacturing process. I found comprehensive life-cycle analyses for two such fluorocarbons, and calculated the costs of making 1250 Tg of each.
HFC-134a. [(Fuglestvedt et al., 2014) used a life cycle analysis for this compound to get their estimate of the CO2 burden of halocarbons in general. It is also relevant because it is the fastest-growing halocarbon at the moment20 and has the highest current production, about 0.15 Tg/yr (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014; Hodnebrog et al., 2013)]. It takes 0.34 tons of fluorite to make 1 ton of HFC-134a, which contains 4 F atoms (A. McCulloch & Lindley, 2003). Using HFC-134a would require 425 Tg of fluorite, or about 1.8x the known global reserves. The carbon burden is 6.6 tonne CO2 per tonne of HFC-134a, so 8,250 Tg of CO2-equivalent total for the project. The global GHG emissions in 2010 were 45,862 Tg [source], so this project would produce 18% of 2010’s total GHG emissions21.
HFC-245fa. [This fluorocarbon has about the right size/complexity, so I think it’s a representative second data point; also, it’s the only other for which I could find a life cycle analysis]. It takes 1.8 tons of fluorite to make 1 ton of HFC-245fa, which contains 5 F atoms (Archie McCulloch, 2009). Using HFC-245fa would require 2,250 Tg of fluorite, or about 10x the known global reserves. The carbon burden is 4.4 tonne CO2 per tonne of HFC-134a, so 5,500 Tg of CO2-equivalent total for the project. This project would produce 12% of 2010’s total GHG emissions.
Storage
It is reasonable to assume that our hypothetical GHG would have characteristics similar to HFC-245fa. In that case, it would have a boiling point near room temperature (HFC-245fa’s is 15ºC) and could probably be stored in liquid form at atmospheric pressure using standard commercial refrigeration units. Since there is a constant cost to keeping that stuff refrigerated, but it’s unclear when (if ever) the GHG would be used, it would probably make the most sense to store it in the arctic after it’s produced. Conveniently, that also places it far away from most natural disasters and people. In fact, HFC-245fa storage would probably look very similar to the Svalbard Seed Vault, but be much, much bigger. Storing 1,250 teragrams would require about a cubic kilometer of storage space (density is 1.4 tonne/m3).
Handle with care
What could be done to minimize risks of unintended release/intentional release (or threat thereof)?
Find a location like that of the Svalbard Seed Vault, but deeper: on stable land, at least tens of miles away from the ocean, and a few hundred meters underground. Given that the GHG would be liquid at ambient temperature most of the year, even a breach of the site would not evaporate the stuff or spill it into the ocean (barring something like a nuclear explosion). Building a whole bunch of smaller sites would probably also make sense and/or be easier.
Nuclear winter vs. SRM
What open questions in the investigation on nuclear climate modeling are important for understanding if a warming geoengineering effort would work?
My answers to all those questions in the nuclear winter investigation was that this or that model could be better. A lot of those same models would be useful for the idea of intentional warming.
    1. Any improvement to global climate models will benefit both research directions.
    2. What is the effect of extra UV on agriculture, the biosphere, and people? This will be a problem with any nuclear winter (it’s not clear whether it’s also a problem in case of supervolcano) [see next section].
    3. The same mesoscale models that could produce better simulations of smoke spreading through the atmosphere could probably model the rise and distribution of GHGs for intentional warming. If the models show that our GHG can get high enough on its own, then the added cost of transporting it into the stratosphere is avoided [see Transport times affect cost].
    4. The agricultural/economic models are the final link between nuclear winter and real effects on people. They can be as simple as “oh dear, 6ºC colder puts us back in the last ice age; that will be really bad” or, for now, as complicated as the models I reviewed before22; either way, I believe that they are always at least implicitly there. Those models inform both our estimate of how bad nuclear winter is (and therefore how much we should be willing to pay to avoid or geoengineer our way out of it) and how much we could achieve through non-geoengineering methods (such as emergency attempts to improve agricultural productivity, reduce waste, and better distribute existing resources so that people don’t starve [see Alternatives]).
So what if it does work?
If we solved the temperature change problems, what other problems would remain? How big of a deal would they be?
If we find ourselves in a nuclear winter (as opposed to a volcanic winter), then there will be plentiful disruption of the ozone layer. This halocarbon intervention would not prevent that problem, and indeed may contribute to it somewhat.23 I’d explored this severity in my nuclear winter investigation; it’s not too bad for people, but we don’t know yet how bad it would be for agriculture or the biosphere.
Alternatives
What else could we do to address those problems? 
The most important question during this investigation is whether there’s any scenario in which the best idea is to use warming geoengineering.
When the nuclear/volcanic winter is small enough, there’s no need. The Pinatubo eruption, for example, did not warrant any countermeasures24 and neither would other small-ish events (this is part of why it’s important to know just how bad their effect on agriculture would be).
It is tempting to say that these measures would be reserved for much larger events only, but then again the scale-up and cost limitations explored elsewhere in this review suggest that there simply isn’t enough fluorite in the world to fix a 3x Pinatubo event (not to mention the $12.5 trillion price tag). If everything scales linearly (size of event, amount of fluorite needed to fix it), then we can maybe afford to fix something like a 1.5x Pinatubo event, which is already very close to the 1.0x event that didn’t really require any counter-measures at all. The window of utility for this solution seems very narrow.
Furthermore, events in this scale between 1x and 3x Pinatubo may be well addressable by shifting agricultural output and priorities. Most (~85% or so) of the climate effects from a 3x Pinatubo event will have faded after 6 years [graph]; temperatures would dip further than in a 100-nuke war [graph] but the effect would be much shorter-lived and so I consider that a 100-bomb war is a worse scenario. The agricultural and economic models that have been applied to a 100-nuke war predict that 215 million people would become malnourished [note], with the most alarmist papers (through some double-counting) saying that 2 billion people would be at risk.25 However, merely shifting the use of existing crops (away from fuels and livestock) may be enough to feed an extra 4 billion people.26
[In an upcoming study, someone else will look more carefully at the question of how to ramp up food production and how much that could solve. My initial readings indicate that we most likely do have the capacity to overcome the sort of minor events that intentional warming could hope to fix]
And finally, we should give some consideration to the other things that, in the absence of a war, we could do with that $12.5 trillion. I gathered some stats to put that number into perspective. First, the world GDP is $114.2 trillion (2015 est., PPP [source]), and the US GDP is $18.5 trillion (2016 est. [source]). For an upper bound on everything, the cost of removing all the excess CO2 from the atmosphere should cost about $234 trillion.27 Second, I found an estimate of the present global cost of preventing catastrophic climate change; it comes out to about 1.6 trillion28. In a similar vein, the cost of geoengineering to cool the climate down enough to counter all our CO2 emissions comes up to ~ $10-90 billion per year (Moriyama et al., 2016). In other words, this emergency warming scenario would cost us way more than fixing related global climate problems.
What I want in the next study
It’s a judgment call whether the problems I’ve described are too many for further consideration. If we did want to have someone pursue this further, I’d recommend the following:
    1. Perform some exploratory computational chemistry, seeking a better HFC. This is by far the most probable way to make this project realistic.
    2. Carry out another global simulation with better modeling of winter-causing events29, and add realistic simulations of HFC release. Use the simulation to model where it goes and when it falls out of the atmosphere.
    3. Figure out the effect of UV light on agriculture, the biosphere, and people.
Other interesting things to note
Halocarbons can generally be considered inert at ground level. In the stratosphere, however, they are broken up by UV light:
“For CFCs and halons, the primary destruction mechanism is ultraviolet photolysis in the stratosphere. CFCs are inert in the troposphere as sufficiently short wavelength ultraviolet radiation does not penetrate into the troposphere. Indeed, it is their chemical inertness that made the CFCs so attractive in industrial and domestic usages.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013)
“It is interesting and worth noting that when detection of CFCs in the atmosphere was first reported, the conclusion included the comment “The presence of these compounds [CFC-11 and CFC-12] constitutes no conceivable hazard” [Lovelock and Maggs, 1973].” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013)
Endnotes
Confidence levels

Figure from (Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, L.V. Alexander, S.K. Allen, N.L. Bindoff, F.-M. Bréon, J.A. Church, U. Cubasch, S. Emori, P. Forster, P. Friedlingstein, N. Gillett, J.M. Gregory, D.L. Hartmann, E. Jansen, B. Kirtman, R. Knutti, K. Krishna Kumar, P. Lemke, J. Marotzke, V. Masson-Delmotte, G.A. Meehl, I.I. Mokhov, S. Piao, V. Ramaswamy, D. Randall, M. Rhein, M. Rojas, C. Sabine, D. Shindell, L.D. Talley, D.G. Vaughan and S.-P. Xie, 2013). This is the methodology used in the assessment reports to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Confidence in Earth Systems Models
The authors used an ESM as their climate model:
"Simulations were performed with the NCAR [National Center for Atmospheric Research] Community Earth System Model version 1.0.3 (CESM1.0.3), using the CAM4 [Community Atmosphere Model version 4] with a resolution of 1.9°×2.5°, coupled to the Community Land Model version 4 and a slab ocean model (average depth of 54 m)" (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014) 
I have confidence in ESMs as a category of climate model, entirely due to this quote:
“ESMs are the current state-of-the-art models, and they expand on AOGCMs [Atmosphere–Ocean General Circulation Models] to include representation of various biogeochemical cycles such as those involved in the carbon cycle, the sulphur cycle, or ozone (Flato, 2011). These models provide the most comprehensive tools available for simulating past and future response of the climate system to external forcing, in which biogeochemical feedbacks play an important role.“ (Flato, G., J. Marotzke, B. Abiodun, P. Braconnot, S.C. Chou, W. Collins, P. Cox, F. Driouech, S. Emori, V. Eyring, C. Forest, P. Gleckler, E. Guilyardi, C. Jakob, V. Kattsov, C. Reason and M. Rummukainen, 2013)
Note that I have no idea how many ESM models exist, what their differences are, how appropriate this one in particular was for the experiment at hand, or how much leeway exists within each model given different parameter choices.
Potency
There are several measures of ‘potency’ for GHGs, and their exact values have changed over the years. In fact, a whole review was written trying to provide a consistent estimate of these values for all GHGs (Hodnebrog et al., 2013). An important basic number is Radiative Efficiency, RE:
“in general, radiative forcing (in units of  Wm<sup>-2</sup>) refers to the effect of a specified change in the concentration of a species, often over some given time period. In this review, we focus on the radiative forcing per unit change in halocarbon mixing ratio—this is referred to as radiative efficiency (RE) ( Wm<sup>-2</sup>ppb<sup>-1</sup>)).” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013).
The most relevant metric in the climate change literature is the one adopted by the Kyoto protocol, Global Warming Potential at 100 years (GWP(100)):
“The Kyoto Protocol adopted one available metric, the Global Warming Potential with a 100 year time-horizon (GWP(100)) [...] The GWP represents the time-integrated radiative forcing due to a pulse emission of a gas. It can be presented as the absolute GWP (AGWP—with units of, for example, W/m-2kg-1year) or, more normally, as a ratio to the AGWP of CO2.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013).
The fact that GWP takes the long view is the reason why GHGs are such a big deal for (non-intentional) global warming calculations: many of them have strong radiative forcing and also last a long, long time, so their contribution to the problem is really high. That contribution used to be 30-40% in the 80s:
“Studies [from the late eighties] indicated that the increase in atmospheric concentrations of CFCs and related compounds was contributing a decadal radiative forcing which was around 30–40% of that due to the increase in carbon dioxide concentrations. Furthermore, it was noted that this share could increase, if the growth in emissions of the CFCs and related molecules was unconstrained.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013).
I haven’t found what that contribution is thought to be at present, but I believe it is still significant (>10%). This figure shows how various halocarbon concentrations have changed over the years.
Since residence times depend on chemical decay constants, they can span many orders of magnitude30. Therefore, though radiative efficiency only varies between 0 and ~0.7 (W/m-2ppb-1; see this figure)31, GWP(100) relative to CO2 varies between 0 and 23,50032.
The overall limits are useful to know, and so are representative examples. The authors’ hypothetical GHG for this calculation had a lifetime of 1 yr and a RE of 0.25  Wm<sup>-2</sup>ppb<sup>-1</sup> at sub-ppb concentrations (with diminishing returns at higher concentrations). Their example for a real GHG, used for comparison is, HFC-152a. It has a lifetime of 1.5 yr and an RE of 0.098  Wm<sup>-2</sup>ppb<sup>-1</sup> at sub-ppb concentrations.
Atmospheric transport of GHGs
At least three important issues are implicitly ignored with the assumption that GHGs are well-mixed in the atmosphere. 
Residence time affects distribution
GHGs with a residence time shorter than a “few months” don’t become well-mixed when they are emitted from too few sources, because they degrade before spreading through the world. 
“Many halocarbons have short lifetimes, are not well mixed in the atmosphere, and the spatial and temporal emission pattern needs to be accounted for in assessments of their radiative efficiencies. [...] For molecules with lifetimes of less than a few months, the atmospheric distribution is dependent on where and when the gases are emitted” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013)
For intentional warming, however, we need GHGs with short lifetimes because a residence time longer than about 1.5 yr is too long for the sort of dynamic adjustments needed to bring climate back carefully and without overshooting.
“The chosen GHG needs to have a short atmospheric lifetime to allow for dynamic concentration adjustments as knowledge of the volcanic forcing evolves. However, the lifetime should be long enough to give independence of emission location (in the case of one emission site) [...] a GHG lifetime of >1.5 years makes it difficult to design an effective counterforcing path.” (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014) 
Thus, the GHG for this application are much more subject to transport considerations than the GHGs that are important in the context of regular climate change (which have long lifetimes). It is unclear just how starkly transport effects change within the lifetime window of “a few months” to 1.5 yr, but it seems reasonable to assume that they are important to model.
Distribution affects radiative efficiency
The effects of atmospheric distribution are particularly important because they also change the effective physical properties of GHGs:
“A further consideration in calculating the RE [Radiative Efficiency] is that the horizontal and vertical distribution of the molecule must be specified—often the baseline assumption is that the molecule is well-mixed within the atmosphere (both horizontally and vertically); corrections to approximately account for the departure from this assumption are then applied [...] for short-lived gases in particular, there is no unique value of RE, as its value depends to some extent on the geographical (and seasonal) distribution of emissions, as these in turn influence the horizontal and vertical distribution of the gas. [...] Since the radiative efficiency of a gas depends on its location (in general, a gas at low latitudes is more effective, as more radiative energy is available to be absorbed at high temperatures), a unique radiative efficiency cannot be defined for such short-lived molecules without a detailed knowledge of the spatial and temporal emission pattern. In addition, the vertical profile of a gas is also influenced by the atmospheric lifetime.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013) 
Transport times affect cost
GHGs need to get to the stratosphere fast. If it is not possible for GHGs to reach the stratosphere fast enough on their own, then they may have to be delivered there by humans, using methods like those developed for intentional global cooling through sulphate aerosols. For those aerosols, delivery at the proper altitude constitutes the majority of the cost and comes up to tens of billions per year for 2  Wm<sup>-2</sup> of forcing (Moriyama et al., 2016).
One would think that it wouldn’t be a problem for intentionally released GHGs to reach the stratosphere, given that we’ve already made plenty of GHGs that get there without trouble. However, that’s in the context of accidental global warming, where we’re worried about their cumulative effect in decades or centuries. For emergency warming, we need the effect to start right away, which means that the GHGs need to get to the stratosphere fast. 
By the way, I also tried to verify that GHGs in fact need to get into the stratosphere. I couldn’t find a direct statement along the lines of “GHGs only affect global warming once they’re in the stratosphere”, but I believe that based on the following evidence:
    1. (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014) always put their GHGs in the stratosphere (well-mixed)
    2. “RF is normally defined at the tropopause including stratospheric temperature adjustment [Forster et al., 2007], the rationale being that the tight coupling between the surface and troposphere means that they behave as a single thermodynamic system; hence it is the change in the input of energy into this system that drives the climate change.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013) If it is the input of energy into the surface-tropopause that matters, then GHGs shouldn’t be able to affect climate change until they are above that region.
This is a great question for an atmospheric scientist, as it seems to be a basic piece of background knowledge on climate change. I spent a long time trying to figure out whether GHGs have an important effect while in the troposphere, but eventually gave up because there’s more important things to do. 
At any rate, my strong impression is that the distribution of GHGs in the atmosphere (vertically and horizontally) is an important determinant of their overall effect.33 Mixing behavior cannot be taken for granted, and would be an important part of a future simulation:
“Mixing processes are most efficient within the troposphere with molecules mixed vertically on the typical timescales of days to weeks. Within the stratosphere the vertical profile of a particular species depends strongly on the relationship between the timescales for transport within the stratosphere and the rate at which the molecule is destroyed. [...] [there is a] multi-year timescale for the molecule to reach deep into the stratosphere.” (Hodnebrog et al., 2013) 


Important figures
Current Halocarbon concentrations

From (Hodnebrog et al., 2013).
Radiative Efficiency

From (Hodnebrog et al., 2013).
3x Pinatubo

From (Fuglestvedt et al., 2014).
Sources
Baum, S. D., Denkenberger, D. C., Pearce, J. M., Robock, A., & Winkler, R. (2015). Resilience to global food supply catastrophes. Environment Systems and Decisions, 35(2), 301–313. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10669-015-9549-2
Flato, G., J. Marotzke, B. Abiodun, P. Braconnot, S.C. Chou, W. Collins, P. Cox, F. Driouech, S. Emori, V. Eyring, C. Forest, P. Gleckler, E. Guilyardi, C. Jakob, V. Kattsov, C. Reason and M. Rummukainen. (2013). Evaluation of Climate Models. In Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Retrieved from https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg1/WG1AR5_Chapter09_FINAL.pdf
Fuglestvedt, J. S., Samset, B. H., & Shine, K. P. (2014). Counteracting the climate effects of volcanic eruptions using short-lived greenhouse gases. Geophysical Research Letters, 41(23), 2014GL061886. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL061886
Helfand, I. (2013). Nuclear Famine: Two Billion People at Risk. International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War. Retrieved from http://www.ippnw.org/pdf/nuclear-famine-two-billion-at-risk-2013.pdf
Hodnebrog, Ø., Etminan, M., Fuglestvedt, J. S., Marston, G., Myhre, G., Nielsen, C. J., … Wallington, T. J. (2013). Global warming potentials and radiative efficiencies of halocarbons and related compounds: A comprehensive review. Reviews of Geophysics , 51(2), 300–378. https://doi.org/10.1002/rog.20013
McCulloch, A. (2009). Life Cycle Inventory Analysis of the Production of a High-performance Foam Blowing Agent HFC-245fa (1,1,1,3,3-pentafluoropropane). Journal of Cellular Plastics. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021955X09349130
McCulloch, A., & Lindley, A. A. (2003). From mine to refrigeration: a life cycle inventory analysis of the production of HFC-134a. International Journal of Refrigeration, 26(8), 865–872. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-7007(03)00095-1
Moriyama, R., Sugiyama, M., Kurosawa, A., Masuda, K., Tsuzuki, K., & Ishimoto, Y. (2016). The cost of stratospheric climate engineering revisited. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-016-9723-y
Nordhaus, W. D. (2010). Economic aspects of global warming in a post-Copenhagen environment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(26), 11721–11726. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005985107
Papasavva, S., & Moomaw, W. (2014). Comparison between HFC-134a and Alternative Refrigerants in Mobile Air Conditioners using the GREEN-MAC-LCCP© Model. International Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Conference | School of Mechanical Engineering | Purdue University. Retrieved from http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2474&context=iracc
Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, L.V. Alexander, S.K. Allen, N.L. Bindoff, F.-M. Bréon, J.A. Church, U. Cubasch, S. Emori, P. Forster, P. Friedlingstein, N. Gillett, J.M. Gregory, D.L. Hartmann, E. Jansen, B. Kirtman, R. Knutti, K. Krishna Kumar, P. Lemke, J. Marotzke, V. Masson-Delmotte, G.A. Meehl, I.I. Mokhov, S. Piao, V. Ramaswamy, D. Randall, M. Rhein, M. Rojas, C. Sabine, D. Shindell, L.D. Talley, D.G. Vaughan and S.-P. Xie. (2013). Technical Summary. In Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Vol. 283). https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13478

# Footnotes
1. <b id="f1"></b> Which is to say, that number for radiative forcing (RF) only holds at low concentrations. To get the full desired effect, you actually need more than you'd expect by dividing that effect by the RF. You need 78 ppb of HFC-152a to get 5 Wm<sup>-2</sup>. The authors reference the calculations that produce this number (part of their atmospheric model), but don't show their math in the paper. [↩](#a1)

2. <b id="f2"></b>  ```“... regional changes will depend on the details of the atmospheric and ocean circulation during and after the eruption. The results would also vary between climate models.”``` (Fuglestvedt, Samset, & Shine, 2014). [↩](#a2)

3. <b id="f3"></b>  0.25 Wm<sup>-2</sup>ppb<sup>-1</sup> at sub-ppb concentrations, with diminishing returns at higher concentrations (which were accounted for to produce estimates of the total concentrations needed). [↩](#a3)

4. <b id="f4"></b> The typical working life of a chemical plant. [↩](#a4)

5. <b id="f5"></b>  Though still more expensive than fixing global warming. [↩](#a5)

6. <b id="f6"></b> See section 2.4 of (Hodnebrog et al., 2013). [↩](#a6)